Before moving on, let's not briefly discuss a relevant and a very important topic called method binding.
It is related to how methods get executed.
I found that even many senior level engineers do not have a good understanding of this topic.
But we will get to the bottom of this through a very in-depth demo.
While discussing polymorphism, we indirectly discuss part of method binding without making any explicit
reference to it.
For example, we said that compiler looks at the reference type to know whether or not we can invoke
a particular method on an object reference.
And we also said that JVM looks at the object type to know which method to execute at runtime.
So that's all method binding.
However, it was discussed in the context of instance methods, but we also have static methods.
So there are some more details which we need to know with regards to method binding.
And let's check them out now.
Method binding is associated with every method.
So every time you see a method call, there is method binding.
And as the name suggests, it is the mechanism of binding, a method called to the declaration and the
implementation of the method being called not the declaration would be the method signature, while
method implementation is the methods body which gets executed at runtime.
So Method Call is associated with these two things.
One is method signature and the other is method implementation.
And these are two distinct steps of method binding.
And we can refer to them as method signature binding and method implementation binding.
And let's look at both of them, beginning with the method signature binding.
Once the compiler encounters a method invocation statement, it checks of the reference type of the
object reference on which the method has been invoked.
Includes a compatible method which would include same or compatible parameters.
And if it finds one, then it writes that method signature information into the byte code.
Otherwise we know that it throws a compiler error and this whole process can be referred to as method
signature binding.
And this is always done by the compiler and it doesn't matter if the method is static or instance.
Next.
When it comes to which method to execute at runtime, the decision can be made by either compiler or
by JVM at runtime, depending on the kind of method in context.
If the method is static, then the decision is made at compile time itself and it is still based on
reference type.
Now if it is an instance method, then the decision is made at runtime by the team and it is based on
the object type.
Recall how JV team picks the most specific version of the method in the inheritance tree, starting
from the object on which the method is invoked.
So basically binding or static methods is completed at compile time itself, which is based on the reference
type.
And it completely makes sense.
That's because static methods are class methods and they don't have anything to do with objects which
are created only at runtime.
So which method to execute at runtime is decided at compile time itself on such a kind of binding is
referred to as compile time binding or early binding.
Whereas binding of instance methods has to wait till runtime as it is dependent on object type that
is only based on the object and quantity at runtime.
We would know what method is to be executed.
Such a kind of binding is referred to as runtime binding or late binding.
But keep in mind that even for instance methods, their method signatures are still bound at compile
time itself.
Lid binding is what we have seen earlier while learning about polymorphism and method overwriting.
And here is the interesting thing.
While instance methods are late, bounded instance variables are early bounded.
That is, reference type is used to bind instance variables.
Fields also include static variables and so they are also early bounded.
So in Java, early binding applies to both static methods and fields.
We will discuss about overriding of instance variables and that should clarify why instance variables
are early bounded.
And let's not do a short demo and it will give us a clear understanding of method binding.
And we will look at byte code to see how this whole process of method binding works.
So we are going to look at some under-the-hood details.
In this demo, we will first look at method binding for static methods followed by method binding,
for instance methods.
After that, we will look at an interesting example.
This time I'm showing the demo in my notepad plus plus editor as I want to run a tool from command line
and the tool helps us in analyzing bytecode.
So it's going to be an interesting demo.
And let's begin with the static method binding.
So these are the classes from our case study, and so we are just going to extend them.
And here is user Java.
I added this static method called static.
It's named as static method and it has an empty body and with an user test java.
So we're creating a staff object and the reference type is user and the object type is staff.
And we are invoking this method, the new method called static method.
Let's just go ahead and compile it.
So it's compiled.
Fine.
Now we want to disassemble.
We want to look at the byte code.
And for that we need a Java.
We need a disk assembler.
So JDK comes with this assembler called Java P.
It's a tool.
You can find it it in your installation directory in the bin folder.
So here I am in my installation directory in JDK 1.8 and in the bin folder I have this tool called Java
P and it can be used to disassemble class files.
The input to the tool would be a class file and it will show you the byte code, which includes the
instructions for JVM.
So let's just do that.
It's Java B minus V, it's an option, which means it's verbose.
You want to show everything.
A lot of details regarding the byte code.
And since the method invocation is done in user test, let's just say user test dot class.
So it needs to be dot class.
And it shows the bytecode of the body of each method within a user test class.
And the interesting thing for us over here is this instruction.
It's called invoke static.
And it also has this number here.
It's an index number.
And this is just a comment which just says what this particular instruction is doing.
So here it says that, you know, there is this new method called static method and it is within the
user class.
And so we are invoking this static method and this information, this empty parenthesis, indicates
that the method does not take any parameters.
And the V this is the return type of the method.
In this case it is void.
So all that information is represented here in this index, and it's an index into a table here at the
top, which is called a constant pool.
But let's not worry about it right now because we will discuss it in the internal chapter.
But whatever is represented there at index ten within that table, the output of that is what you see
here.
But let's just scroll to the top and let's see how that index looks like.
So this is called as a constant pool.
Here it is.
So Index ten is here and it is once again referring to two other index numbers, 29 and 39.
So 29 is here, here.
And it is simply the name of the class and 39 is here.
And it includes the method name and the parameter information and the return type.
So this information, the parameter information and the return type, it's called as the method descriptor
families.
That's how they call it.
So this whole thing is called as the method specification.
User dot static method and on this parentheses followed by the return type.
So that's called this method specification.
So you have the class name, you have the method name and you have the method descriptor, which is
basically the parameter information along with the return type.
So as you can see, the method signature binding has already been done.
Now when a JVM encounters this, when we run this program on JVM and counters this instruction, invoke
static.
So it's going to look at number ten index.
And since it's invoked static, it knows that static method must be inside this user class, which is
the reference type.
And it looks in that class and it finds that method and then it executes it.
So that's early binding.
So invoke static is telling the JVM that this is this is where the class is and you need to invoke it.
Okay, so that's invoke static.
Now next, let's look at invoke virtual.
So if we go back into our class here, we are invoking post review method.
Poster review method is an old method that which we already have in the staff class and it's override.
It's an overriding method, so it overrides the posterior view and user class.
So that's an instance method.
Posterior view is an instance method, as you can see here.
Now let's go back to our command prompt.
And here at line 16, it says Invoke virtual.
So invoke virtual means you are going to invoke an instance methods.
So what does virtual mean?
It means that the method to be invoked will be decided at runtime, right?
That's how instance methods are invoked.
But the method signature binding is already done by the compiler.
So and then here the instruction says that if you go into this index number 12, it has all the information
and that information is represented in this comment here.
As you can see, it says it looks at the reference type.
The reference type is user.
And within that we have this post review method and the parameter is string because it's taking a review,
text a string and the return type is the review object itself.
We know that that's the method signature binding, but at runtime, when JVM encounters this instruction,
it looks at the object type and it it already knows about the method signature because it is there in
the byte code and then it searches the object, the, the class corresponding to the object type and
it tries to find that particular method.
If it is, if it finds it in the same class, it just executes it.
Otherwise it starts climbing up the inheritance tree until it finds a method.
So it tries to find a more specific method which we which we know how.
I mean, we know the whole process, how it works.
So that's how invoke virtual is going to work.
That's the method binding that we just discussed.
So basically invoke static is binding, whereas invoke virtual sense the actual execution, the decision
on which method to execute is happening at runtime.
It's laid binding.
Next, let's look at an edge case example.
It's an interesting example.
Let me show that.
So here I have this method in in user Java.
It's an instance method.
It's named as instance method.
It takes a double parameter, double as a parameter, and it simply prints the name of the class and
the name of the method.
Now in staff I have a similar method instance method here and it takes instead of double, it's taking
eight and once again printing the name of the class and the method name.
But it's not an overriding method because the reason is the parameter here is int, whereas in the superclass
it was double.
So it needs to be the same parameter.
The parameter type has to be same in order.
It's one of the rules for overwriting, so it's not overwriting.
Now in user test, let me just comment this out.
Let me just here is the invocation statement.
So here we are invoking instance method and we are passing a literal one, which is an end.
So we are passing that.
So what do you think?
Which method would be invoked?
Naturally, we would think that since it's an instance method, it would invoke this particular method
in the staff class because it's the most specific version and it has in terms of the parameter.
And the argument passed here is also end.
However, that's that's not going to happen.
And we will also see why the reason for that.
So let me just compile this.
Let me run user test.
As you can see, it's not it's printing.
The instance method in user class are not the one and staff class.
So that's surprising information.
And the reason for that is let me do a Java P on the user test class.
Here is the main method and or the byte code within main method.
And here is the interesting part.
So it says invoke virtual because it's an instance method.
But here it says instance method is an user class, which is okay.
But the main thing is here it says the parameter is double.
It did not say that it is end and the return type of course is void.
And the reason for that is the compiler when it encounters this invocation statement.
So it's going to look at user class and it's going to see if it can find a compatible method, if it
can find a compatible method.
So it first looks at the method name.
So in user class it finds this method name and then it looks at if if there is a compatible parameter.
So here the parameter is int in the invocation statement, but here the parameter is double.
So it is a double is compatible because because of implicit it can be implicitly cast it to double.
So that's that's a compatible type.
So in the byte code it writes the method signature as instance method and it says the parameter has
to be double.
And so at runtime, you know, when JVM, when it looks at this instruction, it sees that, okay,
here is the instance method and it looks at the object type.
So it starts from staff and in stuff it does not find this method, right?
Because there is an instance method, but in stuff it is, it has the parameter int so it climbs up
the inheritance tree and it goes into user and there it sees that there is this instance method with
the double as parameter and so it executes that.
And so that's the reason why we are seeing that.
So that's an interesting thing and the compiler tries to find a compatible method and that was the main
reason for this strange behavior.
And I also tested the same thing for for another method which is also named as instance method.
But instead of primitive, we are having the user as the parameter and this is a user Java.
And in staff we have stuff as a parameter which is a subtype.
So it's just this exact same behavior.
Truly we don't even have to test it.
It's just it's just a instead of primitive, we are using the same.
Reference type.
So as you can see, it's printing user and instance method this time.
So so that's it.
That's an edge case.
And most of this information is coming from an article written by Kishori Sharan, who is the author
of Harnessing Java seven, which is one of the book's good books.
So I'm going to upload that article in the resources section, or I'll be providing a link to that article.
I'll be doing one of them so you can, if you are interested, you can look at them, but the entire
information is presented here, so you don't have to do that.
But if you're interested, you can check that out too.
And that's it.